

===== PAGE 1 =====
1524 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 1, 1 JANUARY 2026
A Game-Theoretic Framework of Interaction and
Cooperative Driving for CA Vs at Mixed
Unsignalized Intersections
Yiming Cui
 , Shiyu Fang
 , Qian Chen, Yafei Wang
 , Member, IEEE, Peng Hang
 , Senior Member, IEEE,
and Jian Sun
 , Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—During the ongoing development and proliferation
of autonomous driving, human-driven vehicles (HDVs) and
connected automated vehicles (CA Vs) will coexist in mixed
traﬃc environments for the foreseeable future. However, current
autonomous driving systems (ADSs) often face challenges in
ensuring optimal safety and e ﬃciency, particularly in complex
conﬂict scenarios. To address these shortcomings and improve
cooperation in mixed tra ﬃc environments, this article presents
a game-theoretic decision-making method. The proposed frame-
work accounts for both CA V–CA V cooperation and CA V–HDV
interaction in mixed tra ﬃc at unsignalized intersections. It
introduces a parameter updating mechanism based on twin
games to dynamically adjust HDVs’ parameters to better predict
and respond to variable human driving behaviors. To validate
the eﬀectiveness of the proposed cooperative driving framework,
the comparative analysis of its safety and e ﬃciency with other
established methods is conducted. The results demonstrate that
our method successfully ensures both safety and e ﬃciency in
mixed traﬃc environments. Compared with reinforcement learn-
ing (RL) approaches such as I-PPO, it achieves a 35%–55%
improvement in success rate while maintaining decision stabil-
ity and tra ﬃc e ﬃciency. In contrast to methods that enforce
strict safety guarantees, our approach improves the average
vehicle speed by 0.1–0.6 m /s and the average CA V speed by
0.7–1.7 m /s, without compromising safety. Additionally, several
validation experiments are conducted using a hardware-in-the-
loop and human-in-the-loop experimental platform, conﬁrming
the practical applicability of the method.
Index Terms—Connected automated vehicles (CA Vs), cooper-
ative decision-making, twin game, unsignalized intersection.
I. I NTRODUCTION
W
ITH the rapid advancement of autonomous driving and
connectivity technologies, the number of self-driving
Received 3 August 2025; accepted 2 November 2025. Date of publication
5 November 2025; date of current version 23 December 2025. This work was
supported in part by the State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Transportation
System under Project 2024-A002, in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 52472451, in part by Shanghai Scientiﬁc
Innovation Foundation under Grant 23DZ1203400, and in part by the Funda-
mental Research Funds for the Central Universities. (Corresponding author:
Peng Hang.)
Yiming Cui, Shiyu Fang, Qian Chen, Peng Hang, and Jian Sun are
with the Key Laboratory of Road and Tra ﬃc Engineering of the State,
Ministry of Education, Tongji University, Shanghai 201804, China, and also
with the State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Transportation System, Bei-
jing 100088, China (e-mail: 2310796@tongji.edu.cn; 2111219@tongji.edu.cn;
2331650@tongji.edu.cn; hangpeng@tongji.edu.cn; sunjian@tongji.edu.cn).
Yafei Wang is with the School of Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China (e-mail: wyfjlu@sjtu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109 /JIOT.2025.3629356
cars will increasingly rise, leading to a long-term mixed tra ﬃc
environment with both human-driven vehicles (HDVs) and
connected automated vehicles (CA Vs) [1], [2]. The key to
enhancing the safety and e ﬃciency of individual vehicles and
the overall traﬃc system lies in accurately interacting between
CA V and HDV , as well as achieving e ﬃcient cooperation
among CA Vs [3].
However, current pilot applications of autonomous driving
frequently encounter problems all around the world, and
autonomous vehicles (A Vs) have not yet demonstrated the
safety and e ﬃciency advantages expected. According to the
U.S. NHTSA [4], 392 accidents involving Level 2 autonomous
driving systems (ADSs) were reported over a ten-month period
between 2021 and 2022. Current A V agents have limited
intelligence and struggle to handle complex conﬂict scenarios
eﬀectively [5]. On the one hand, interactions between A Vs
and HDVs tend to be overly conservative, lacking adaptive
adjustment capabilities [6]. On the other hand, A Vs lack
coordinated decision-making abilities with other A Vs, leading
to more challenging congestion and deadlock situations.
The SAE J3216 standard categorizes cooperative driving
automation (CDA) into four levels: status sharing, intent shar-
ing, agreement seeking, and prescriptive [7]. The development
of vehicle-to-vehicle cooperation and enabling technologies
oﬀers new solutions to address A V interaction challenges in
complex environments [8].
Existing research on vehicle cooperation primarily focuses
on scenarios that involve only CA Vs. These can be categorized
into reservation-, optimization-, reinforcement learning (RL)-,
and game-based methods. Moreover, the introduction of HDVs
presents new challenges, necessitating di ﬀerent characteriza-
tions and considerations of HDVs in these methods [9].
The reservation-based approach is the most widely applied
method for resolving tra ﬃc conﬂicts in vehicle cooperation
scenarios, allocating the spatial resources of conﬂict zones
over speciﬁc time intervals [10]. The basic ﬁrst-come ﬁrst-
serve (FCFS) method, which allows only one vehicle to enter
the conﬂict zone at a time, generally results in relatively
lower overall tra ﬃc e ﬃciency [11], [12]. To improve the
eﬃciency, tree or graph-based structures are employed to
search for vehicle passing orders to facilitate sequential vehicle
passage [13], [14]. Xu et al. [15] proposed a virtual rotational
projection method at intersections to simplify the vehicles on
the entry lanes by projecting them into a 1-D space and then
2327-4662 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artiﬁcial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication /redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on March 06,2026 at 08:06:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 2 =====
CUI et al.: GAME-THEORETIC FRAMEWORK OF INTERACTION AND COOPERATIVE DRIVING FOR CA Vs 1525
integrating passing topology to generate a conﬂict-free passing
sequence tree. Although the resource reservation approach is
conceptually clear and computationally straightforward, it may
fail under high-density tra ﬃc ﬂow. Additionally, in mixed
traﬃc environments, human drivers’ limited compliance with
predeﬁned rules further complicates the determination and
implementation of passing sequences.
The optimization-based approach formulates an optimiza-
tion problem aimed at resolving vehicle conﬂicts and achieving
passing tasks with objectives such as minimizing travel time
or delay [16], [17]. Another common strategy involves a
bi-level planning framework for intersections, where the upper
level determines the timing windows and passing sequence
based on spatiotemporal conﬂict relationships and the lower
level optimizes individual trajectories and vehicle actions [18],
[19]. Although the optimization-based approach can address
conﬂicts in complex environments, it signiﬁcantly increases
the complexity of solutions, posing challenges for real-time
implementation [20].
In recent years, with the development of machine learning
theories and applications, RL has emerged as a popular method
for solving vehicle-to-vehicle cooperation issues [21], [22].
RL aims to enable agents to learn optimal action strate-
gies through interactions with the environment, considering
long-term beneﬁts. Several studies have applied multiagent
reinforcement learning (MARL) to model multivehicle tra ﬃc
systems, demonstrating impressive results in scenarios such as
lane changing [23], merging [24], and intersections [25]. Due
to the inherent limitations of RL, concerns remain regarding
its safety performance. Some RL-based approaches have made
additional considerations for safety and robustness, especially
under adversarial scenarios. Certain methods aim to ensure the
probability of generating safe policies during the optimization
process by introducing safety thresholds and Lagrangian con-
straints within the RL algorithm itself [26]. Meanwhile, other
studies on decision-making for autonomous driving reduce
collision rates by incorporating additional safety enhancement
modules into the decision-making framework [27], [28]. How-
ever, RL still faces challenges such as the subjective design of
reward functions, di ﬃculties in ensuring complete safety, and
limited scalability across diverse scenarios [29].
Game theory is rooted in human decision-making logic,
which makes interactive behaviors more interpretable and
enables eﬀectively addressing conﬂict issues in complex traf-
ﬁc environments. Cooperative game theory methods have
been applied in scenarios such as intersections and ramp
merging in fully CA V environments [30]. Various nonco-
operative game methods, such as Stackelberg games and
level-k games [31], have also been used in mandatory lane
changing [32], [33], intersections [34], and merging zone [35],
[36] among other interactive decision-making scenarios [37],
[38]. Game theory, by considering the interdependencies of
decisions, can replicate human decision-making logic, thus
oﬀering good adaptability in human–machine mixed driving
environments [39].
Currently, research predominantly focuses on either the
cooperation among vehicles in scenarios characterized by
100% penetration of A Vs or the interaction between CA V and
HDVs from the perspective of a single CA V . However, there is
a notable lack of comprehensive analysis regarding the interac-
tions between CA Vs and HDVs in mixed traﬃc environments.
Furthermore, most studies treat HDVs as dynamic obstacles
or model them using simplistic car-following models. This
approach fails to adequately capture the dynamic interactive
behaviors of HDVs, thereby limiting the accuracy in depicting
interactions between CA Vs and HDVs e ﬀectively. Finally,
autonomous driving technology is developing rapidly and has
practical application needs. Most existing research methods are
primarily veriﬁed through numerical simulations and analysis
of simulation results, lacking experimental implementations
that are essential for real-world applications.
A Vs interacting with HDVs often make erroneous decisions
leading to safety and e ﬃciency issues due to inaccurate
predictions and judgments of human driving behavior [40],
[41]. This predicament stems from the diversity of individ-
ual driving behaviors and the behavioral uncertainty during
interactions among human drivers. However, human driver
models constructed through calibrated parameters essentially
assign ﬁxed labels to drivers, which proves insu ﬃcient for
capturing the dynamic uncertainties inherent in human drivers’
interactive behaviors.
To address the limitations in existing research and enhance
safe and eﬃcient cooperation in mixed tra ﬃc environments, a
cooperative decision-making method based on game theory is
introduced. This method addresses tra ﬃc conﬂicts in complex
interactive scenarios, with intersections as the primary case
study for demonstration. We propose a cooperative decision-
making model for CA Vs based on cooperative game theory
and develop an interaction model between CA Vs and HDVs
using the Stackelberg game framework, which e ﬀectively
captures the dynamic interaction features of HDVs. Models
are integrated through a bi-level programming approach to
establish a comprehensive interactive decision-making model
for mixed tra ﬃc scenarios. Our contributions are shown as
follows.
1) The proposed cooperative driving framework involves
not only the interaction between CA Vs and HDVs
but also the cooperation among CA Vs, aligning more
closely with real mixed driving scenarios and e ﬀec-
tively addressing the safety and e ﬃciency challenges in
autonomous driving.
2) This study takes fully account of HDV’s uncertainty
during the dynamical interaction process by dynamically
identifying and adjusting parameter values related to the
weight of reward function according to the results of the
twin game.
3) A comprehensive experimental platform, integrating
human-in-the-loop and hardware-in-the-loop testing, has
been established to validate the proposed model’s ability
to address the uncertainties of human driver interactions
and the feasibility of deploying the algorithms in real
vehicles.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
identiﬁes research questions, illustrates the cooperative driv-
ing framework for mixed tra ﬃc, and introduces the typical
unsignalized intersections scenario. Section III introduces the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on March 06,2026 at 08:06:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 3 =====
1526 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 1, 1 JANUARY 2026
Fig. 1. Framework of the cooperative driving model at the mixed tra ﬃc, unsignalized intersection.
design of individual reward function and the cooperative
decision-making model of CA Vs based on the cooperative
game. Section IV introduces an interaction decision-making
model between CA Vs and HDVs based on the Stackel-
berg game. In Section V, the cooperative driving framework
is validated through numerical, hardware-in-the-loop, and
human-in-the-loop experiments. Section VI concludes this
work and provides future directions.
II. P ROBLEM STATEMENT AND COOPERATIVE
DRIVING FRAMEWORK
At unsignalized intersections, when multiple vehicles simul-
taneously approach the conﬂict zone, there are complex
conﬂicts between each other that share space–time resources.
Moreover, for the human–machine mixed tra ﬃc in the fore-
seeable future during the development process of autonomous
driving, conﬂicting vehicles may contain both CA Vs and
HDVs. Meanwhile, it is a di ﬃcult task for CA Vs to achieve
conﬂict resolution safely and complete tra ﬃc tasks e ﬃciently
with the unknown intentions of human drivers. E ﬀectively
resolving conﬂicts and managing tra ﬃc ﬂow at unsignalized
intersections with mixed tra ﬃc is a crucial issue.
The left part of Fig. 1 presents a thumbnail of the research
scenario. In addition, our research is based on the following
assumptions.
1) Since the primary focus is on the complex interactions
and cooperation within unsignalized intersections, lane-
changing maneuvers of both HDVs and CA Vs upstream
of the intersection are not considered.
2) Once a vehicle enters the cooperation area, its state (i.e.,
position, speed, and acceleration) can be fully observed
by other vehicles through onboard perception systems
and vehicle-to-vehicle state-sharing mechanisms.
To address the complex conﬂicts and achieve safe and
eﬃcient cooperation in mixed tra ﬃc environments, a multi-
vehicle cooperative decision-making method coupled with the
interaction between CA Vs and HDVs and the cooperation of
CA Vs based on game theory is designed. The cooperative
driving framework is present in Fig. 1. The entire model
is expressed as a bi-level optimization problem, structured
such that the objective is to maximize the overall reward of
cooperative CA Vs, with constraints on maximizing the reward
of each HDV .
Speciﬁcally, a cooperative decision-making model for all
CA Vs based on cooperative game theory is proposed to
determine their decision actions. For each vehicle, a reward
function considering safety, eﬃciency, and comfort is designed
to represent individual returns under diﬀerent actions. The total
reward for a single vehicle is expressed as a weighted sum
of these three components. The overall reward for the CA V
group is the sum of individual rewards. The cooperative game
model for CA Vs is formulated as a single-level constrained
optimization problem aiming to maximize the total reward of
all CA Vs. Safety constraints are designed to ensure the most
basic safety guarantees among CA Vs. The cooperating CA Vs
satisfy a set of principles, including individual rationality and
group rationality.
Moreover, an interaction model between CA Vs and HDVs
is constructed based on the Stackelberg game. In this
model, all CA Vs are treated as a uniﬁed whole, adopting
a leader–multifollower structure. Due to the solving charac-
teristics of the Stackelberg game, the model is formulated
as a bi-level programming problem. It speciﬁcally consists
of two key steps: action computation based on the optimal
twin parameters and the update of twin parameters. Optimal
parameters are used to build accurate CA Vs’ cognition of
HDVs’ rewards, based on which the decision actions of CA Vs
in mixed tra ﬃc scenarios are computed. For each set of CA V
values, HDV actions can be estimated according to the opti-
mal cognition parameters, thereby deriving the corresponding
CA Vs reward and identifying the maximum possible reward.
These parameters are referred to as twin parameters, which
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on March 06,2026 at 08:06:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 4 =====
CUI et al.: GAME-THEORETIC FRAMEWORK OF INTERACTION AND COOPERATIVE DRIVING FOR CA Vs 1527
reﬂect the HDV’s pReferences for safety and e ﬃciency. At
each decision-making step of the CA Vs in the mixed tra ﬃc
environment, multiple twin parameter values are generated for
each HDV . For each of these values, the corresponding HDV
estimated action is obtained through a twin game approach.
The twin parameter whose estimated HDV action is closest to
the actually observed HDV behavior is selected as the optimal
parameter, and its closeness is used to calculate a ﬁtness score.
Based on the value of this ﬁtness, new twin parameter samples
are generated within a deﬁned range to support further twin
game computations.
Finally, to demonstrate the feasibility and e ﬀectiveness
of the cooperative driving framework, cases are designed
for experimental veriﬁcation from multiple perspectives. The
comparison of the simulation results with di ﬀerent methods is
conducted, which includes rule-, reservation-, and RL-based
methods. Also, the potential of the method for scalability with
respect to the number of vehicles is veriﬁed. Additionally, val-
idation experiments are performed to verify the feasibility of
method application, including the CA V cooperative algorithm
veriﬁcation of domain controller in the loop and collaborative
algorithm veriﬁcation in mixed tra ﬃc of human driving in the
loop.
III. C OOPERATIVE DRIVING MODEL FOR CAVS
BASED ON COOPERATIVE GAME
For CA V systems, the e ﬀectiveness of motion planning
depends on its capability to achieve e ﬃcient cooperative
driving and optimal resource utilization within complex traf-
ﬁc environments. Cooperative game theory is well-suited to
model this challenge, as it treats each vehicle as an agent
whose decisions are interdependent with those of other vehi-
cles, rather than operating in isolation. Cooperative game
theory eﬀectively captures the interdependencies and interac-
tions among vehicles, enabling the system to optimize overall
performance.
A. Design the Reward Function
First, the reward function of game theory in this article
is deﬁned. The same design is applied to both cooperative
game and Stackelberg game, while CA V and HDV also share
the same reward function components. The reward function
is designed considering the requirements of safety, e ﬃciency,
and comfort in the process of driving, and the same function
composition is used for di ﬀerent types of vehicles. The single
vehicle’s total proﬁt is the weighted sum of three indicators
fi =
3X
ind=1
wiind fiind = w1i f1i + w2i f2i + w3i f3i (1)
where i can be a vehicle that is either CA V or HDV , f1i is
the safety indicator, f2i is the e ﬃciency indicator, f3i is the
comfort indicator, w1i–w3i are weight of the three indicators,
and fi is the total proﬁt of vehicle i.
The distance di ﬀerence to collision (DDTC) is used as a
safety metric, which is calculated by the di ﬀerence in travel
distances to the conﬂict point between two interactive vehi-
cles. Since the calculation results of distance di ﬀerence may
signiﬁcantly exceed the required threshold, it is considered to
be safe enough when DDTC i j> DDTCthre. The mathematical
expression is shown in the following equation:
f1i =− min
j
(
min
˚
DDTCi j− DDTCthre, 0
	
DDTCthre
)
DDTCi j =
ˇˇ∆Li j− ∆L ji
ˇˇ
∆Li j = li j− xk+1
i (2)
where j is the conﬂicting vehicle of i in list of game players,
DDTCi j is the DDTC of vehicle i and j, ∆Li j is the distance
from the conﬂict point of vehicle j on the trajectory of vehicle
i, DDTCthre serves as the safe threshold indicating that the dis-
tance diﬀerence to the conﬂict point between the two vehicles
is suﬃciently large, li j is the position of the conﬂict point of
vehicle i and j on the travel path of vehicle i, and xk+1
i is the
position of vehicle i at the next timestamp calculated according
to the kinematic equations. If DDTC i j> DDTCthre, this index
is calculated as 0 for the corresponding vehicles i and j. The
outer min operation is applied to all j∈ S CA V∪ S HDV\{ j},
that is, all other vehicles within the deﬁned game-theoretic
range that are in conﬂict with vehicle i. The minimum value
from the computed results was selected, which corresponds
to the most safety-critical vehicle from i’s perspective. The
minimum value of the DDTC i j calculation result of vehicle i
is selected as the security representation of vehicle i, that is,
the most serious conﬂict. Normalization is performed in the
formula by dividing by DDTC thre.
Speed is used as a measure of e ﬃciency as shown in the
following equation, which is updated according to kinematics
equations:
f2i = vk+1
i
Vmax
i
(3)
where vk+1
i is the speed of vehicle i at the k + 1 timestamps
and Vmax
i is the maximum speed of vehicle i. Similarly,
normalization is performed in the formula by dividing byVmax
i .
The squared di ﬀerence in acceleration before and after the
update is employed to represent comfort as shown in the
following equation:
f3i =
 
ak+1
i − ak+1
i
2
 
Amax
i − Amin
i
2 (4)
where ak+1
i is the acceleration of vehicle i and ak
i is the accel-
eration of vehicle i at the current timestamp. Normalization is
performed by dividing by the maximum acceleration change
amplitude for a single step, which is the di ﬀerence between
the maximum acceleration of vehicle i Amax
i and the minimum
acceleration of vehicle i A min
i .
Particularly, given the need to adjust the parameter weights
of the HDV in real time during the interaction process,
reducing the number of parameters is essential to avoid
exponentially increasing computational load. For the reward
function of HDV , the processing procedure in the following
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on March 06,2026 at 08:06:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 5 =====
1528 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 1, 1 JANUARY 2026
equation is performed on the weight values of safety and
eﬃciency indicators:
(
w1i = P cos2 (θi)
w2i = Q sin2 (θi) , θ i∈
h
0,π
2
i
(5)
where P and Q are ﬁxed constants and universally applicable
constants for all HDVs. θi is the simpliﬁed parameter with a
trigonometric relationship to w1i and w2i, which varies across
diﬀerent HDVs and evolves dynamically during interactions
(for details, refer to Algorithm 2). In this way, the safety
and eﬃciency reward of HDV are characterized and updated
through only one parameter θ in our model.
B. Establish the Cooperative Model of CAVs
Cooperative games are a class of games in which play-
ers can coordinate, communicate, and collaborate to achieve
shared objectives and optimize collective outcomes. These
games concentrate on devising strategies for rational resource
allocation, making optimal decisions, and establishing robust
cooperation mechanisms among participants. The primary aim
is to maximize overall utility and achieve superior outcomes.
Through such structured collaboration, cooperative games
explore the dynamics of group decision-making, emphasizing
the synergies that can be created when individuals work
together toward common goals. Di ﬀering from the non-
cooperative game that regards other participants as rivals
and emphasizes maximizing individual proﬁt, the cooperative
game can maximize the overall beneﬁts of the participants,
thereby achieving Pareto optimality. However, the cooperative
game must meet the requirements of superadditivity, individual
rationality, and group rationality.
Lemma 1 ([42]): A cooperative game has superadditivity
and satisﬁes the principle of individual rationality and group
rationality.
Superadditivity characterizes the condition where the col-
lective reward of a coalition exceeds the sum of rewards
obtained by its individual members operating independently.
This principle is mathematically expressed as
R (Vi) + R
 
V j

≤ R
 
Vi∪ V j

(6)
where R(Vi) denotes the reward function for vehicle i and Vi∪
V j represents a coalition consisting of vehicles i and j.
Furthermore, the principle of individual rationality is
expressed by the inequality
R (Vi)≤ Ri
 
Vi∪ V j,..., ∪Vn

(7)
where Ri(Vi∪ V j,..., ∪Vn) indicates the reward for vehicle i
when participating in a coalition with up to n vehicles. This
condition ensures that each vehicle achieves a greater reward
in a cooperative setting than it could achieve independently.
Finally, group rationality is deﬁned by the summation of
individual rewards, aiming to achieve the collective goals of
the system
O =
X
i∈N
R (Vi) (8)
where O represents the overall objective of the cooperative
game, which is simultaneously the aggregate of individual
rewards.
Based on the fundamental concepts of cooperative game
theory, this article constructs a model for cooperation among
CA Vs. The proposed cooperative model of CA Vs is capable
of calculating individual actions of CA Vs as a tier of the
bi-level optimization problem constructed in mixed tra ﬃc
ﬂows. Additionally, it can also be used to solve for the decision
actions of CA Vs in scenarios consisting purely of CA Vs. The
speciﬁc formulation of the model is presented in the following
equation:
max
AS CA V∈DS CA V
FS CA V
 
AS CA V

=
X
i∈S CA V
fi
s.t. amin
i ≤ ai≤ amax
i
v2
i1− 2ai1∆Li1i2≤ 0 or v2
i2− 2ai2∆Li2i1≤ 0
i1, i2∈ S CA V (9)
where S CA V is a set of all CA Vs, AS CA V denotes the action
sequence of S CA V, D represents the policy space of the
subscripted object, and FS CA V denotes the overall reward func-
tion value of S CA V deﬁned as the sum of individual CA V
rewards. amin
i and amax
i , respectively, denote the minimum and
maximum acceleration limits for CA V i, thereby deﬁning the
boundaries of the decision variables. Finally, safety constraints
are deﬁned, ensuring that at least one of any two CA Vs can
brake before reaching the conﬂict point.
IV. I NTERACTION DECISION -M AKING MODEL BETWEEN
CAVS AND HDV S BASED ON STACKELBERG GAME
Current research on the cooperation issues of CA Vs often
assumes fully CA V environments, but this assumption is overly
idealistic and fails to reﬂect the reality that CA Vs and HDVs
will coexist on the roads for an extended period. Studies
that consider mixed tra ﬃc scenarios frequently treat HDVs as
dynamic obstacles or characterize them with simplistic models,
neglecting the interactive characteristics and heterogeneity of
HDVs. To address this gap, a framework for cooperative
driving of CA Vs in mixed tra ﬃc scenarios is proposed.
This framework formulates a leader–multifollower Stackelberg
game between CA Vs as a whole and HDVs and introduces
a twin game parameter update mechanism to accommodate
the uncertainties of HDVs in dynamic interactions, ultimately
determining the optimal decision actions for CA Vs.
The vehicles within a certain range of the intersection are
considered to have entered the scope of planning considera-
tion, namely, they will participate in the game. S CA Vand S HDV
represent the set of CA Vs and HDVs that are involved in the
game, respectively.
A. Stackelberg Game Bi-Level Optimization Problem
Noncooperative game theory is a signiﬁcant branch of game
theory in which players pursue their individual goals by
adopting noncooperative strategies. In noncooperative games,
each player has full control over their own beneﬁts and
actions, but there is incomplete or asymmetric information
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on March 06,2026 at 08:06:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 6 =====
CUI et al.: GAME-THEORETIC FRAMEWORK OF INTERACTION AND COOPERATIVE DRIVING FOR CA Vs 1529
regarding other players’ strategies and information. Within this
context of uncertainty, participants must analyze the actions of
others and consider potential countermeasures to reﬁne their
own strategies. Ultimately, each participant aims to make the
optimal decision to maximize their own beneﬁts.
The Stackelberg game is a production leadership model
ﬁrst proposed by the German economist H. von Stackelberg
in the 1930s, falling under the category of noncooperative
games. Participants are divided into two roles: leaders and
followers. After the leader makes a decision, the followers
react accordingly. The leader’s ﬁnal decision is based on their
expectations of the followers’ response.
Practical observations reveal that current A Vs often demon-
strate excessive conservatism in interactive scenarios, far
exceeding actual safety requirements and causing unneces-
sary e ﬃciency degradation. Moreover, such overly passive
A V behaviors may lead human drivers to question and even
challenge A Vs’ capabilities.
The one-leader–one-follower Stackelberg game has been
widely applied in CA V–HDV decision-making problems. In
these studies, it is generally accepted to designate the CA V
as the leader and HDVs /other vehicles as followers [38], [43].
Unlike passive interaction decision-making, our designed A V
algorithm aims to achieve proactive interaction capabilities.
Based on the deﬁnition of Stackelberg game and its equilib-
rium, the leader–follower assumption enables the leader-CA V
to fully consider HDVs’ potential behavioral responses to
A V actions, thereby reaching Stackelberg equilibrium. This
approach fundamentally empowers CA Vs with active interac-
tion abilities.
Lemma 2: Existence of Stackelberg Equilibrium.
A Stackelberg equilibrium is a solution concept in sequential
games where the leader commits to a strategy, and the follower
observes this strategy and the follower optimally responds.
The equilibrium consists of a pair of strategies where the
leader maximizes their payo ﬀ, considering the follower’s best
response to the leader’s chosen strategy.
In a ﬁnite Stackelberg game, there exists at least one
Stackelberg equilibrium. Consider a Stackelberg game with a
leader L and a follower F. Let S L and S F denote the strategy
sets of the leader and the follower, respectively. Let uL(sL, sF)
and uF(sL, sF) be the reward functions for the leader and the
follower, respectively, where sL∈ S L and sF∈ S F.
The pair of strategies ( s∗
L, s∗
F(s∗
L)) forms a Stackelberg equi-
librium if
s∗
L = arg max
sL∈S L
uL
 
sL, s∗
F (sL)

s∗
F (sL) = arg max
sF∈S F
uF (sL, sF) ∀sL∈ S L. (10)
Consequently, a Stackelberg equilibrium exists when the
leader’s strategy maximizes its payo ﬀ, taking into account
the follower’s optimal response to the leader’s strategy, and
the follower’s strategy maximizes its payo ﬀ given the leader’s
chosen strategy.
Based on the basic principle of Stackelberg game and
backward induction method, the bi-level model and speciﬁc
optimization problems are established in (11). The optimiza-
tion objective is to maximize the overall beneﬁt of CA Vs.
The decision variables are the accelerations of CA Vs, sub-
ject to acceleration limits and safety constraints for collision
avoidance. The optimal actions of HDVs are formulated as a
single-level optimization problem within the constraints
max
AS CA V∈DS CA V
FS CA V
 
AS CA V

s.t. θ j =θ j
∗
k
a∗
j = arg max
a j∈D j
f j
 
AS CA V

amin
i ≤ ai≤ amax
i
amin
j ≤ a j≤ amax
j
v2
j− 2a j∆L ji≤ 0 or v2
i− 2ai∆Li j≤ 0
i∈ S CA V, j∈ S HDV (11)
where AS CA V denotes the action sequence of S CA V, D represents
the policy space of the subscripted object, and FS CA V denotes
the overall reward function value of S CA V. θ j represents the
proﬁt-related parameters of the HDV j as deﬁned in (5), taking
its optimal value at time k, denoted as θ j∗
k. When CA Vs adopt
AS CA V, the optimal action a∗
j of HDV j is determined by the
principle of optimal response. amin
i and amax
i , and amin
j and amax
j ,
respectively, denote the minimum and maximum acceleration
limits for CA Vi and HDV j, thereby deﬁning the boundaries of
the decision variables. Finally, safety constraints are deﬁned,
ensuring that at least one of any two vehicles can brake before
reaching the conﬂict point.
The implementation process of the proposed method is
illustrated in the form of pseudocode, as shown in Algorithm 1.
When continuous vehicle inﬂow exists at the intersection, we
adopt a dynamic grouping mechanism to enable cooperative
passage for a larger number of vehicles, thereby supporting
scalability veriﬁcation in high-density mixed tra ﬃc scenarios.
The core idea is to hierarchically decompose continuous traﬃc
ﬂow into multiple distributed cooperative subproblems. When
vehicles enter the predeﬁned game-trigger region (e.g., from
50 m before the stop line to the exit of the conﬂict zone), they
are dynamically grouped according to the following rules. In
each round, the vehicle closest to the intersection center c0 is
selected as the subgroup anchor. Then, for each of the other
entry lanes, the vehicle closest to c0 is matched to form a coop-
erative subgroup consisting of 1–4 vehicles. Grouped vehicles
are excluded from subsequent rounds, and the above process is
repeated until all vehicles are assigned to a subgroup. For each
cooperative subgroup, the optimal actions of the CA Vs are
solved using the constrained bi-level optimization framework
described in (11), and the corresponding estimated actions of
HDVs are also obtained.
B. Parameter Updating Mechanism Based on Twin Game
In real intersection scenarios, HDVs interacting with other
vehicles exhibit variations in safety and e ﬃciency consid-
erations by human drivers over time and across di ﬀerent
interaction states. A ﬁxed-parameter model struggles to cap-
ture the uncertainties inherent in interactions HDVs, making
it diﬃcult for CA Vs to accurately infer HDV strategies, which
hinders the improvement of interaction safety and e ﬃciency.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on March 06,2026 at 08:06:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 7 =====
1530 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 1, 1 JANUARY 2026
Algorithm 1 Bi-Level Model-Based Game Theory
To address this, a mechanism based on twin games for real-
time updating of HDV’s parametersθ is designed, dynamically
adjusting to accommodate the variations and uncertainties in
HDV’s behavior. This section will provide a detailed intro-
duction to the parameter space of the twin games, the method
for determining the optimal parameters, and the approach for
updating the parameter space.
At time t = k, the parameter space requiring twin calcu-
lations is deﬁned as a list of parameter values shown in the
following equation:
Θk
j =
˚
θk
j1,θ k
j2,...,θ k
jm,...,θ k
jn( j,k)
	
, j∈ S HDV (12)
Algorithm 2 Twin Game Parameter Update Algorithm
where Θk
j is the list of twin parameters of HDV j at t = k.
θk
j1,θ k
j2,...,θ k
jm,...,θ k
jn(k) is the total parameter values of the
twin game calculation of j, in which θk
jm represents the mth
strategy available to vehicle j at time step k and n( j, k) is
the total number of twin parameters for vehicle j at time step
t = k.
To systematically explore all possible combinations of
parameters among the HDVs, the Cartesian product of the
strategy sets for each j∈ S HDV is computed. The Cartesian
product Θk is deﬁned in the following equation:
Θk = Θk
j1× Θk
j2×··· × Θk
j|S HDV| (13)
where× denotes the Cartesian product operator. This results
in a comprehensive set of all possible strategy combinations,
where each θk
m in (14) is an element of the corresponding
strategy set Θk
ji. By leveraging the Cartesian product, all
potential interactions and strategic conﬁgurations among the
HDVs are accounted for in the analysis, thereby ensuring a
thorough exploration of the decision-making landscape
θk
m =

θk
j1m j1
,θ k
j2m j2
,...,θ k
j|S HDV|m j|S HDV|

(14)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on March 06,2026 at 08:06:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 8 =====
CUI et al.: GAME-THEORETIC FRAMEWORK OF INTERACTION AND COOPERATIVE DRIVING FOR CA Vs 1531
where θk
jm j represents the value of the parameter related to
HDV j within θk
m, corresponding to the m jth element of the
set of all possible values Θk
j.
For each parameter combination θk
m in Θk, it is substituted
into the model (11) and replace the ﬁrst constraint with θ j =
θk
m, resulting in the creation of twin models whose number is
|Θk| =|Θk
j1|×|Θk
j2|×··· ×|Θk
j|S HDV||.
For the mth parameter combination model, the computed
actions for all HDVs are represented by the vector a∗km shown
in (15), where a∗k
jm j denotes the computed action for vehicle
j under this particular parameter combination. Here, star *
represents the calculated optimal actions of HDVs according
to (11) under the parameter θk
m, and a∗k
jm j is actually a∗
j in
(11).Ak
m represents the set of computed results for all HDVs
at time k from the parameter combinations in Θk
a∗k
m =

a∗k
j1m j1
, a∗k
j2m j2
,..., a∗k
j|S HDV|m j|S HDV|

Ak =
˚
a∗k
m
ˇˇ m∈
ˇˇΘkˇˇ	
. (15)
After obtaining a series of results Ak
j from the model, the
similarity between the computed actions of all HDVs and
the real actions can be measured. The similarity between the
computed actions of HDVs and the real actions is deﬁned
using the Manhattan norm. Select the parameter combination
corresponding to the highest similarity as the optimal param-
eter value for the next time step, so as to achieve optimal
parameter value updates in the following equation:
m∗ = arg min
m∈|Θk|
a∗k
m− ak
real

1. (16)
The best parameter combination is updated to θk
m∗. The
updated optimal parameter θk
m∗ is applied to the proposed
model in (11) at the next timestamps based on which the
CA V’s optimal execution action is calculated.
For each j∈ S HDV, the similarity between the corresponding
action component in the computed result a∗km∗ under the
condition m∗ and its actual action need to be calculated
separately, aiming to determine the number of twin parameter
values required for j at the next time step. This is deﬁned as
the ﬁtness, which indicates the degree to which each parameter
combination in the previous time step’s twin parameter list
matches the current action of j. The speciﬁc deﬁnition of
ﬁtness is as follows:
α j = 1−
ˇˇˇˇˇ
a∗k
jm∗− ak
jreal
ak
jreal
ˇˇˇˇˇ (17)
where a jreal is the real action of HDV j at time step t = k
and a∗k
jm∗ is the model computation action corresponding
to m∗ of j. Evidently, the value range of α j is [0, 1], and
as α j increases, a∗k
jm∗ becomes closer to a jreal, indicating that
the current optimal parameter combination of the model m∗ is
more adaptable to the interaction state of the current HDV j.
Then, the number of twin parameter values for the next
time step is determined based on α, by establishing a mapping
relationship between n( j, k + 1) and α j. The g function can be
used to represent the mapping relationship in the following
equation:
n ( j, k + 1) = g
 
α j

=
8
ˆˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆˆ:
n1, if α j∈ [0, a1)
n2, if α j∈ [a1, a2)
... ...
nm, if α j∈ [am−1, 1]
(18)
where g(α j) represents the mapping relationship from α j to
n( j, k + 1) and α j∈ [0, 1]. The intervals [ a1, a2), [a2, a3), ... ,
[am−1, 1] cover the entire range of [0 , 1]. The values within
each interval n1, n2,..., nm correspond to di ﬀerent values of
n( j, k + 1). When α j is small, it indicates that the current
optimal parameters poorly adapt to HDV j. According to
(17), this means that the computed HDV actions under all
current twin parameters signiﬁcantly deviate from the actual
observations. Consequently, more twin parameter values need
to be explored in the next timestep to better capture HDV’s
potential action space, thus requiring a larger value of n.
Therefore, the number of twin parameter values needs to
satisfy the following relationship: n1 > n2 > n3 >··· > nm.
To ensure the feasibility of (19), it is further required that
n1, n2,..., nm are odd numbers.
As shown in (18), the mechanism of determining the number
of twin parameters based on ﬁtness e ﬀectively controls the
exponential growth of parameters at the individual level. As
the interaction process progresses, the CA V’s estimation of
HDV actions becomes increasingly accurate, leading to a
corresponding reduction in the number of twin parameters
required.
After determining the number of twin parameters, it is also
necessary to determine the speciﬁc values of these parameters.
The upper and lower limits of the twin parameter values of
vehicle j are ﬁrst established, followed by the speciﬁc value
of each twin parameter by interpolating within the interval. To
maintain the basic computational e ﬀectiveness of the model,
it should be ensured that θk
jm∗ is still included in the twin
parameter list Θk+1
j at t = k + 1. Parameters are generated
on both sides of θk
jm∗ as the center, as shown in the following
equation:
θk+1
j min = max

θk
jm∗− n ( j, k + 1)
n1
× π
2, 0

θk+1
j max = max

θk
jm∗ + n ( j, k + 1)
n1
× π
2, 0

Θk+1
j
=
8
<
:θk+1
j min + i·
2

θk
jm∗−θk+1
j min

n− 1
ˇˇˇˇ i = 0, 1,..., n− 1
2
9
=
;
∪
˚
θk
jm∗
	
∪
8
<
:θk
jm∗ + i·
2

θk+1
j max−θk
jm∗

n− 1
ˇˇˇˇ i = 0, 1,..., n− 1
2
9
=
; (19)
where n1 is the maximum number deﬁned in (18). Through
the above calculations, the next-time twin parameters Θk+1
j
for each vehicle in S HDV can be determined, thereby updating
(12). This completes one iteration.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on March 06,2026 at 08:06:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 9 =====
1532 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 1, 1 JANUARY 2026
V. C ASE STUDY AND EXPERIMENTAL VERIFICATION
To validate the e ﬀectiveness and feasibility of the pro-
posed framework, veriﬁcation is conducted from two aspects.
On the one hand, the simulation results of various meth-
ods in highway-env are compared, including reservation-,
RL-, and proposed game theory-based methods. On the other
hand, several validation experiments are conducted using
a hardware-in-the-loop and human-in-the-loop experimental
platform based on CARLA to verify the practical applicability
of the proposed method.
A. Numerical Simulations
This section conducts numerical simulation and perfor-
mance analysis of the proposed method from three perspec-
tives. First, we compare the proposed method (with and
without the twin parameter updating mechanism, G-Nontwins
and G-Intwins) against several baseline methods in terms of
safety and e ﬃciency metrics. The baseline methods include
the rule-based ﬁrst-in-ﬁrst-out (FIFO) method, the reservation-
based PIDM method, a single-agent RL method ( singlePPO),
and a multiagent RL method ( IPPO). Second, a typical mix
traﬃc scenario involving four vehicles is selected to intuitively
demonstrate the execution process of the proposed method
and its decision-making rationality under complex interac-
tions. Finally, to verify the adaptability and scalability of
the proposed method under di ﬀerent tra ﬃc sizes, tests are
conducted in mixed tra ﬃc scenarios involving 2–12 vehicles.
The simulation results are then systematically analyzed.
The simulation environment is built upon a single unsignal-
ized four-way intersection. This environment is developed
based on the open-source platform highway-env [44],
which provides a concise and e ﬃcient testing framework
for autonomous driving decision-making tasks. HDVs in the
background tra ﬃc are controlled by the intelligent driver
model (IDM), forming a stable ﬂow of background tra ﬃc.
In highway-env, a simple collision avoidance logic is
designed for HDVs; if a potential collision is predicted within
a certain horizon while maintaining the current speed, the
HDV will proactively decelerate to avoid conﬂict. In all
simulation environments, the maximum acceleration of CA Vs
is set to 3 m /s2, the minimum acceleration is set to −3 m/s2,
and the maximum speed limit is set to 10 m/s, ensuring realism
and controllability of the simulated scenarios.
For the convenience of subsequent analysis, the basic con-
cepts of the evaluation metrics adopted in this study are
introduced in advance.
1) Post-Encroachment Time:This metric measures the time
diﬀerence between two vehicles successively passing
through a conﬂict point. It is an ex post indicator that can
be observed and recorded during each experimental trial.
In one experiment case, a post-encroachment time (PET)
value can be formed between each pair of vehicles.
2) Time Di ﬀerence to Collision: For safety evaluation
throughout the entire interaction process, the time diﬀer-
ence to collision (TDTC) is introduced as a key metric.
TDTC represents the time di ﬀerence required for the
involved vehicles to reach the conﬂict point from their
current states. It serves as a proxy for assessing the
safety level during the interaction process.
3) In addition, the average speed of vehicles during the
passage process is used as an e ﬃciency metric.
1) Comparative Evaluation of Di ﬀerent Methods: Since the
designed cooperative triggering mechanism divides at most
four vehicles into one cooperative group each time, the four-
vehicle cooperative scenario becomes the core and typical
application case of the proposed method. Based on this,
four vehicles are selected as the experimental subjects for
comparative analysis among di ﬀerent methods. The scenario
is set as a mixed tra ﬃc ﬂow containing 2 CA Vs and 2 HDVs
to verify the decision rationality and cooperative capability
of the proposed method under heterogeneous and complex
conditions.
To comprehensively evaluate the performance of the pro-
posed method, three types of baseline methods are designed:
rule-based methods, reservation-based methods, and RL-based
methods. Comparative experiments are conducted under the
same simulation environment. In addition, to verify the
eﬀectiveness of the proposed twin mechanism, two of our pro-
posed methods are designed for comparison: one dynamically
updates the HDV reward function weight parameters through
twin games (denoted as G-Intwins) and the other keeps the
HDV weight parameters ﬁxed at their initial values (denoted
as G-Nontwins).
The classical FIFO method is adopted as one of the baseline
schemes. This method restricts only one vehicle to enter the
intersection control area at a time (deﬁned as the region from
10 m before the stop line to the whole conﬂict zone). Under
this mechanism, vehicles pass through the intersection in
their arrival order, thereby achieving a basic conﬂict-avoidance
strategy.
The reservation-based strategy using virtual platoon projec-
tion [15], referred to as PIDM, maps the positions of vehicles
from a 2-D space to a 1-D queue. By computing the relative
distance to the conﬂict point, a virtual platoon structure is
formed. Longitudinal control actions are then generated based
on a car-following model (e.g., IDM) to achieve indirect
cooperative passage.
In the selection of RL methods, the proximal policy opti-
mization (PPO) algorithm is chosen due to its advantages such
as high computational e ﬃciency, capability to handle both
continuous and discrete action spaces, relative implementation
simplicity, and broad applicability. Therefore, the standard
PPO algorithm provided by the Stable-Baselines3 library is
adopted as a comparative method and is trained through
interaction within the simulation environment provided by
highway-env. On this basis, two RL-based comparative
methods are designed: a single-agent RL method (denoted as
singlePPO) and a multiagent RL method (denoted as IPPO).
The IPPO method enables e ﬃcient learning and policy con-
vergence in a multiagent environment based on independent
training for each agent. It demonstrates good scalability and
generalization capabilities, making it suitable for modeling and
solving cooperative decision-making problems.
In the simulation experiments, the test scenario includes
four entrance lanes, each assigned one vehicle waiting to pass
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on March 06,2026 at 08:06:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 10 =====
CUI et al.: GAME-THEORETIC FRAMEWORK OF INTERACTION AND COOPERATIVE DRIVING FOR CA Vs 1533
TABLE I
AGGREGATED INDICATORS RESULTS OF COMPARISON METHODS
Fig. 2. Boxplot for speed comparison.
through the intersection. The initial positions of the vehicles
are randomly generated within a range of 50–60 m from the
intersection, and their initial speeds are randomly sampled
within the range of 30–36 km/h. The speciﬁc driving directions
of the vehicles are also randomly assigned to simulate diverse
traﬃc conﬂict situations. To enhance the robustness of the
experimental results and improve the reliability of statistical
analysis, a total of 20 di ﬀerent random seeds are set to cover
various initial vehicle conﬁgurations and traﬃc ﬂow scenarios.
First, the success rate of vehicle passage for each method
is recorded across di ﬀerent cases. The average speed and
minimum PET during the passage process for each vehicle are
also collected. For all cases, the average values of these metrics
are computed separately for all vehicles, CA Vs, and HDVs and
summarized in Table I. In addition to average statistics, we
further analyze the distribution of average speed and minimum
PET for all vehicles and for CA Vs using Figs. 2 and 3, in order
to illustrate the di ﬀerences in distribution across methods.
First, cases in which no collision occurred and no dead-
lock was observed during the intersection passage process
are marked as successful. Except for the RL-based methods
singlePPO and IPPO, methods with explicit safety guarantees
such as FIFO, PIDM, as well as the proposed method, all
achieved a 100% success rate. Due to the inherent limitations
of RL and its constrained generalization capability, singlePPO
and IPPO exhibited a certain proportion of failure cases under
complex interaction scenarios, indicating insu ﬃcient safety
assurance in such environments.
In terms of passage eﬃciency, the average speed of vehicles
during the intersection passage process is compared across
Fig. 3. Boxplot for PET comparison.
diﬀerent methods. The proposed G-Intwins method achieves
the best overall performance in tra ﬃc eﬃciency, with an aver-
age speed of 8.29 m /s. Although the average speed of CA Vs
under G-Intwins and G-Nontwins is slightly lower than that
under singlePPO, it should be noted that the relatively higher
speed achieved by singlePPO comes at the cost of signiﬁcantly
reduced safety. In contrast, G-Intwins and G-Nontwins main-
tain high passage eﬃciency while ensuring safety. Meanwhile,
we observe that FIFO and PIDM tend to produce relatively
low CA V speeds and large speed discrepancies between CA Vs
and HDVs. This suggests that these two methods may lack
interaction awareness, causing CA Vs to passively adapt to
HDV behaviors rather than make proactive decisions. By
contrast, the proposed method objectively enables CA Vs and
HDVs to achieve more consistent speed ranges, reﬂecting the
intended cooperative and interactive capability of CA Vs. In
addition, singlePPO and IPPO exhibit more extreme speed
distributions. In some cases, the average speed of CA Vs drops
to as low as 1.5 m /s, indicating signiﬁcant ﬂuctuations in
decision quality and policy stability.
In terms of safety, for all successful cases under each
method, PET values between every pair of vehicles are
computed. For each vehicle, the minimum PET during its
passage process is selected for statistical analysis. First, under
the FIFO method, the distribution range of minimum PET
values across all vehicles is quite broad, with a maximum
reaching nearly 10 s. In particular, CA Vs exhibit a generally
high distribution of minimum PET values. While this ensures
complete safety, it also results in an excessive loss of e ﬃ-
ciency. In the successful cases of singlePPO and IPPO, PET
values are distributed above 1 s, indicating that safe passage is
theoretically achievable. However, the high collision rates of
these methods remain nonnegligible, and the exhibited safety
performance is not su ﬃciently convincing. Additionally, both
RL-based methods show occurrences of abnormally large PET
values (exceeding 10 s), further revealing their instability. In
contrast, the PIDM method and the proposed G-Nontwins
and G-Intwins methods keep PET values within a reasonable
range—neither too large nor unsafe. In particular, the proposed
method shows PET values concentrated around 2.5 s, provid-
ing suﬃcient safety margins while improving space utilization
eﬃciency. This demonstrates a well-achieved balance between
safety and e ﬃciency.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on March 06,2026 at 08:06:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 11 =====
1534 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 1, 1 JANUARY 2026
Fig. 4. Statistical chart of dangerous conditions during interactions.
(a) Critical moment. (b) Critical zone.
However, since the comparative analysis with other methods
is conducted based on all passage moments across all cases,
the di ﬀerence between G-Nontwins and G-Intwins appears
to be insigniﬁcant. In fact, this is because most moments
during the passage process are not highly critical, and the
interaction intensity is relatively low, so the twin parameter
updating mechanism may not produce a visually noticeable
eﬀect at the aggregate level. Nonetheless, a further analysis
reveals that the twin-based game-theoretic parameter updating
mechanism signiﬁcantly enhances cooperative performance
in strongly interactive mixed tra ﬃc scenarios. As shown in
Fig. 4, we extract and analyze data under critical conditions;
in Fig. 4(a), we deﬁne a critical moment as any time during
the interaction process when the TDTC between any two
vehicles is less than 2 s. The speed and TDTC values at those
moments are extracted for analysis. Similarly, in Fig. 4(b),
we deﬁne a critical zone as the area from 10 before to
20 m beyond the intersection stop line. The speed and TDTC
information of vehicles located in this zone are also extracted.
We ﬁnd that in Fig. 4(a), the G-Intwins method yields a
speed distribution nearly identical to that of G-Nontwins
but achieves signiﬁcantly higher TDTC values (Wilcoxon
signiﬁcance test, p = 0.012). This suggests that the twin-
based game-theoretic parameter update improves safety at
temporally critical moments without compromising e ﬃciency.
In Fig. 4(b), it is observed that the twin-based method results
in generally higher speeds during vehicle passage through the
conﬂict zone, while maintaining TDTC values above 1.5 s,
which ensures safe interaction.
2) Representative Case Study: A speciﬁc interaction seg-
ment is selected to detail the implementation process of the
G-Intwins method during the entire intersection passage from
a results perspective, as illustrated in Fig. 5. For ease of
analysis, the initial time point is chosen when one HDV ,
vehicle #0, has already passed all conﬂict points and exited
the intersection. Therefore, the focus is placed on analyzing
the subsequent behaviors of HDV #1 and CA Vs #2 and #3.
At T = 8 s, since vehicle #0 has already exited the conﬂict
zone of the intersection, the participants in the game are
limited to vehicles #1–#3. For vehicle #1, its behavior at
this moment is mainly inﬂuenced by vehicle #2. Regardless
Fig. 5. Comparison indicators of varying numbers of vehicles. (a) Temporal
segmentation of vehicle states. (b) #1 acceleration and theta time-varying plot.
Fig. 6. Comparison indicators of varying numbers of vehicles.
of whether #2 accelerates or decelerates, #1 is closer to the
conﬂict point formed by #1 and #2, and its speed of 3.98 m /s
is signiﬁcantly higher than #2’s speed of 0.03 m /s. Therefore,
the model predicts that #1 will accelerate to simultaneously
increase the safety margin and improve e ﬃciency. Based on
this, with accurate prediction of the HDV behavior by the
CA Vs, vehicle #2 chooses a small acceleration to maintain
the speed diﬀerence with #1 and thereby increase the distance
from the conﬂict point. The distance di ﬀerence from #1 and
#3 to their conﬂict point is relatively large, satisfying the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on March 06,2026 at 08:06:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 12 =====
CUI et al.: GAME-THEORETIC FRAMEWORK OF INTERACTION AND COOPERATIVE DRIVING FOR CA Vs 1535
Fig. 7. Experimental platform setup and scenario design. (a) Device conﬁguration and environment construction of CARLA. (b) Conﬁguration and
implementation of CA V and HDV in CARLA, while Scenario-(1) of two CA Vs and Scenario-(2) in mixed tra ﬃc are designed.
safety margin requirement. Furthermore, vehicles #2 and #3
are far apart with no strong conﬂict, and considering safety
to some extent, the cooperation between #2 and #3 tends to
result in #3 accelerating with an acceleration of 1.95 m /s2.
At T = 9 s, the situation of vehicle #1 remains unchanged.
However, as the distance between #1 and #2 further increases,
#2 accelerates with a higher acceleration. At this moment, the
conﬂict between #2 and #3 gradually becomes the primary
conﬂict. To increase the distance di ﬀerence to the conﬂict
point between them, vehicle #3, which is farther from the
conﬂict point, decelerates. At T = 10 s and T = 11 s,
vehicle #1 exits the conﬂict zone, transforming the game into
a cooperative game between vehicles #2 and #3. At this time,
vehicle #2 is closer to the conﬂict point and has a higher speed,
so both vehicles can accelerate simultaneously to ensure safety
beneﬁts while improving e ﬃciency.
3) Scalability Analysis With Varying Number of Vehicles:
To validate the model’s adaptability under varying tra ﬃc
complexities and to demonstrate the scalability of the proposed
method as the number of vehicles increases, multiple simula-
tion scenarios were designed with 2, 4, 8, and 12 vehicles.
Vehicles were evenly distributed across the entrance lanes of
the intersection (e.g., 3 vehicles per direction in the 12-vehicle
scenario). For each case, ten di ﬀerent random seeds were
used to generate diverse initial conditions, including the initial
vehicle positions (randomly distributed between 50 and 150
m from the intersection), vehicle types (CA V /HDV randomly
assigned), and ﬂow directions (left-turn/straight randomly set).
The performance was evaluated in terms of safety (PET) and
eﬃciency (average speed), as shown in Fig. 6.
In the two-vehicle scenario, the interaction is minimal,
leading to high passing speed and relatively large PET values.
In the four-vehicle scenario, the interaction becomes more
intense, resulting in lower average speed and reduced PET
values, although PET remains above 1.1 s, ensuring safety. In
the more complex 8- and 12-vehicle scenarios, the interaction
becomes highly intense and intricate. However, by leverag-
ing the proposed cooperative subgroup division mechanism,
our method remains applicable, maintaining safe operation
(PET > 1.0 s) and achieving relatively high passing speeds
(average speed > 4 m /s), demonstrating the scalability and
eﬀectiveness of the proposed approach.
B. Hardware-in-the-Loop and Human-in-the-Loop
Experiment of CAV Cooperative Method
A hardware-in-the-loop and human-in-the-loop experimen-
tal platform is developed using CARLA. Within CARLA,
a map identical to the experimental test ﬁeld of Tongji
University’s Intelligent Connected Vehicle Evaluation Base is
constructed, and a typical cross intersection within this map
is selected as the experimental scenario. The construction of
this experimental platform is completed in the Ubuntu 20.04
operating system environment, utilizing Robot Operating
System 2 (ROS2).
In the implementation of the domain control in-the-loop
simulation environment, several steps are undertaken to ensure
eﬃcient system integration and operation. Initially, the host
environment is set up, followed by the deployment of a custom
Docker container. The host then subscribes to various topics
deﬁned by CARLA to gather position, speed, or acceleration
data of all tra ﬃc participants, including CA Vs and HDVs.
These data are used to compute cooperative control outcomes.
Subsequently, a new topic is created on the host as an inter-
mediary for publishing vehicle control messages. Within the
domain control Docker, ROS2 equipped with the rclpy library
subscribes to receive these messages and publishes them to
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on March 06,2026 at 08:06:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 13 =====
1536 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 1, 1 JANUARY 2026
Fig. 8. Speed curve of vehicles during experiment under Scenario-(1).
a dedicated topic for vehicle control, thereby enabling direct
command of the vehicle. This structured approach facilitates
a robust simulation environment that e ﬀectively integrates
multiple components and data streams for real-time vehicle
management. To establish human-in-the-loop experimental
conditions, there is a unit external Logitech steering wheel
and pedals (Model G29), and the human driver controls the
HDV in CARLA through the steering wheel and pedals.
Research indicates that planning a left turn can be partic-
ularly challenging for an A V in heavy tra ﬃc [45]. The ﬁrst
experiment involves a scenario of an unprotected left turn
with two CA Vs to verify the possibility of CA V cooperative
algorithm deployment and application under purely CA Vs.
Approaching from opposite directions of the intersection, one
vehicle proceeds straight, while the other executes a left turn
shown in Fig. 7-Scenario-(1).
The scalar instantaneous speed of two CA Vs, collected
during their driving by CARLA, is recorded and plotted in
Fig. 8. Observing the speed curves of the two vehicles, around
5 s, both vehicles enter the predeﬁned interaction range.
According to the model’s calculations, Veh3 decelerates to
yield while Veh1 continues to accelerate, thereby resolving
the conﬂict. At about 8 s, Veh1 nearly reached its maximum
speed through acceleration and was the ﬁrst to exit the conﬂict
point, while Veh3 accelerated through the area. The god’s-eye
view and each vehicle’s perspective videos of the experiment
can be found on https: //yimcui.github.io/Cooperative-driving/.
Additionally, the PET value recorded during the interaction
between the two vehicles is 3.5 s, indicating that the algorithm
has achieved conﬂict resolution.
In order to verify the e ﬀectiveness of the cooperative
algorithm and the twin game in the mixed tra ﬃc scenario,
the second experiment is conducted in the scenario of three
CA Vs and one HDV shown in Fig. 7-Scenario-(2). Three
subjects with di ﬀerent driving styles are selected to complete
the driving task of HDV and interact with three CA Vs in the
designed scenario. The states of vehicles are collected at each
step during the experiment for analysis, including the position,
speed, and acceleration information of each vehicle.
Three drivers have participated in this experiment. We select
the experimental results from one of the drivers and analyze
the states of vehicles at several key moments as the vehicles
pass through the intersection. Additionally, the acceleration
curve of the HDV and the changes in the twin parameters are
plotted, as shown in Fig. 9(b). Observing the HDV during the
Fig. 9. Vehicle interaction status information in one experiment under
Scenario-(2). (a) Vehicle position states at di ﬀerent moments during the
interaction process. (b) Calculated and real acceleration curve and twin
parameter of HDV .
4–13-s interval, when it is within the interaction range consid-
ered by the model, the calculated acceleration values closely
matched the actual values in terms of both overall trend and
magnitude. During the vehicle’s operation, the twin parameters
are updated according to the rules described in Section IV-B.
The optimal twin parameter values for di ﬀerent drivers have
not exhibited drastic changes as seen in simulations but rather
tend to stabilize. Moreover, the optimal twin parameter values
vary across di ﬀerent drivers.
PETs between each pair of vehicles during the crossing
process are also calculated, with the overall PET values falling
within the safe range. The minimum PET between Veh3 and
Veh0 is 1.20 s. This can be attributed to the fact that the
HDV had a certain blind spot in its ﬁeld of vision, preventing
it from accurately observing the approaching Veh3 from the
left, leading to an acceleration action contrary to the expected
deceleration. Another reason is that Veh0 and Veh3 were the
last two vehicles to leave the intersection, and after Veh0 exited
the conﬂict zone, the algorithm deemed all conﬂicts resolved,
prompting Veh3 to accelerate with maximum acceleration,
further reducing the PET value.
VI. C ONCLUSION
Given the complexities of mixed traﬃc scenarios, especially
at unsignalized intersections where HDVs and CA Vs coexist,
existing research exhibits signiﬁcant limitations. Key short-
comings include inadequate exploration of the interactions
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on March 06,2026 at 08:06:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 14 =====
CUI et al.: GAME-THEORETIC FRAMEWORK OF INTERACTION AND COOPERATIVE DRIVING FOR CA Vs 1537
between CA Vs and HDVs, as well as insuﬃcient internal coor-
dination among CA Vs. Furthermore, there is a lack of accurate
representation of HDVs’ dynamic interactive behaviors. We
propose a game-based framework for cooperative driving at
mixed unsignalized intersections, and the main conclusions
are summarized as follows.
1) Mixed Traﬃc Cooperation Framework: This study pro-
poses a comprehensive framework that simultaneously
considers the collaboration among CA Vs and the interac-
tion between CA Vs and HDVs in mixed traﬃc scenarios.
This framework more closely aligns with real-world
human–machine mixed driving scenarios and e ﬀectively
addresses the safety and e ﬃciency issues faced by
autonomous driving from an individual vehicle perspec-
tive when encountering HDVs and other CA Vs.
2) Dynamic Adjustment for HDVs: The study introduces a
parameter updating mechanism based on twin games,
crucial for adapting to real-world mixed tra ﬃc inter-
actions between HDVs and CA Vs. This innovative
mechanism dynamically adjusts HDV parameters to
better predict and respond to variable human driving
behaviors. By enhancing the accuracy and reliability
of these predictions, the model signiﬁcantly improves
the safety and e ﬃciency of HDV–CA V interactions,
addressing critical challenges in ADSs.
3) Algorithm Validation and Experimentation: The val-
idation of the proposed algorithms was rigorously
conducted through a two-phase approach, beginning
with detailed numerical simulations to reﬁne the models
under various tra ﬃc scenarios. This was followed by
extensive real-world testing, including hardware-in-the-
loop and human-in-the-loop experiments. These stages
were crucial for demonstrating the algorithms’ e ﬀec-
tiveness and adaptability in actual driving conditions,
proving their potential to enhance safety and e ﬃciency
in dynamic tra ﬃc environments.
In future work, we will focus on further optimizing the
model and apply it to continuous traﬃc ﬂow and other complex
driving conﬂict scenarios.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Alessandrini, A. Campagna, P. D. Site, F. Filippi, and L. Persia,
“Automated vehicles and the rethinking of mobility and cities,” Transp.
Res. Proc., vol. 5, pp. 145–160, Jan. 2015.
[2] D. Song, B. Zhu, J. Zhao, and J. Han, “Human–machine shared lateral
control strategy for intelligent vehicles based on human driver risk
perception reliability,” Automot. Innov., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 102–120, Feb.
2024.
[3] A. Sharma, Y . Ali, M. Saifuzzaman, Z. Zheng, and M. M. Haque,
“Human factors in modelling mixed tra ﬃc of traditional, connected,
and automated vehicles,” in Adv. Human Factors Simul. Model., Proc.
AHFE Int. Conf. Human Factors Simul. Model., Los Angeles, California.
Cham, Switzerland: Springer, Jul. 2017, pp. 262–273.
[4] Summary Report: Standing General Order on Crash Reporting for Level
2 Advanced Driver Assistance Systems , N. H. T. S. Administration,
Bergeijk, The Netherlands, 2022.
[5] S. Noh, “Decision-making framework for autonomous driving at road
intersections: Safeguarding against collision, overly conservative behav-
ior, and violation vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. , vol. 66, no. 4,
pp. 3275–3286, Apr. 2019.
[6] W. Zhan, C. Liu, C.-Y . Chan, and M. Tomizuka, “A non-conservatively
defensive strategy for urban autonomous driving,” in Proc. IEEE 19th
Int. Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst. (ITSC) , Nov. 2016, pp. 459–464.
[7] Taxonomy and Deﬁnitions for Terms Related To Cooperative Driving
Automation for On-road Motor Vehicles , SAE, Warrendale, PA, USA,
2020.
[8] I. O. Olayode, L. K. Tartibu, M. O. Okwu, and A. Severino,
“Comparative traﬃc ﬂow prediction of a heuristic ANN model and a
hybrid ANN-PSO model in the tra ﬃc ﬂow modelling of vehicles at a
four-way signalized road intersection,” Sustainability, vol. 13, no. 19,
p. 10704, Sep. 2021.
[9] S. Mariani, G. Cabri, and F. Zambonelli, “Coordination of autonomous
vehicles: Taxonomy and survey,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 54, no. 1,
pp. 1–33, Jan. 2022.
[10] K. Dresner and P. Stone, “A multiagent approach to autonomous
intersection management,” J. Artif. Intell. Res. , vol. 31, pp. 591–656,
Mar. 2008.
[11] L. Chen and C. Englund, “Cooperative intersection management: A
survey,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. , vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 570–586,
Feb. 2016.
[12] D. Carlino, S. D. Boyles, and P. Stone, “Auction-based autonomous
intersection management,” in Proc. 16th Int. IEEE Conf. Intell. Transp.
Syst. (ITSC), Oct. 2013, pp. 529–534.
[13] C. Chen, Q. Xu, M. Cai, J. Wang, J. Wang, and K. Li, “Conﬂict-free
cooperation method for connected and automated vehicles at unsignal-
ized intersections: Graph-based modeling and optimality analysis,” IEEE
Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. , vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 21897–21914, Nov.
2022.
[14] H. Xu, Y . Zhang, L. Li, and W. Li, “Cooperative driving at unsignalized
intersections using tree search,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. ,
vol. 21, no. 11, pp. 4563–4571, Nov. 2020.
[15] B. Xu et al., “Distributed conﬂict-free cooperation for multiple con-
nected vehicles at unsignalized intersections,” Transp. Res. C, Emerg.
Technol., vol. 93, pp. 322–334, Aug. 2018.
[16] X. Pan, B. Chen, S. Timotheou, and S. A. Evangelou, “A convex optimal
control framework for autonomous vehicle intersection crossing,” IEEE
Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. , vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 163–177, Jan. 2023.
[17] J. Ma, X. Li, F. Zhou, J. Hu, and B. B. Park, “Parsimonious shooting
heuristic for trajectory design of connected automated tra ﬃc part II:
Computational issues and optimization,” Transp. Res. B, Methodol. ,
vol. 95, pp. 421–441, Jan. 2017.
[18] Z. Sun, T. Huang, and P. Zhang, “Cooperative decision-making for
mixed tra ﬃc: A ramp merging example,” Transp. Res. C, Emerg.
Technol., vol. 120, Nov. 2020, Art. no. 102764.
[19] M. Karimi, C. Roncoli, C. Alecsandru, and M. Papageorgiou,
“Cooperative merging control via trajectory optimization in mixed
vehicular traﬃc,” Transp. Res. C, Emerg. Technol. , vol. 116, Jul. 2020,
Art. no. 102663.
[20] M. A. S. Kamal, J.-I. Imura, T. Hayakawa, A. Ohata, and K. Aihara,
“A vehicle-intersection coordination scheme for smooth ﬂows of tra ﬃc
without using tra ﬃc lights,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. , vol. 16,
no. 3, pp. 1136–1147, Jun. 2015.
[21] A. Oroojlooy and D. Hajinezhad, “A review of cooperative multi-agent
deep reinforcement learning,” Int. J. Speech Technol. , vol. 53, no. 11,
pp. 13677–13722, Jun. 2023.
[22] A. Irshayyid, J. Chen, and G. Xiong, “A review on reinforcement
learning-based highway autonomous vehicle control,” Green Energy
Intell. Transp., vol. 3, no. 4, Aug. 2024, Art. no. 100156.
[23] W. Zhou, D. Chen, J. Yan, Z. Li, H. Yin, and W. Ge, “Multi-agent
reinforcement learning for cooperative lane changing of connected and
autonomous vehicles in mixed tra ﬃc,” Auto. Intell. Syst. , vol. 2, no. 1,
p. 5, Dec. 2022.
[24] S. Zhou, W. Zhuang, G. Yin, H. Liu, and C. Qiu, “Cooperative on-ramp
merging control of connected and automated vehicles: Distributed multi-
agent deep reinforcement learning approach,” in Proc. IEEE 25th Int.
Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst. (ITSC) , Oct. 2022, pp. 402–408.
[25] G.-P. Antonio and C. Maria-Dolores, “Multi-agent deep reinforcement
learning to manage connected autonomous vehicles at tomorrow’s
intersections,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 71, no. 7, pp. 7033–7043,
Jul. 2022.
[26] S. Gu et al., “Safe multi-agent reinforcement learning for multi-robot
control,” Artif. Intell., vol. 319, Jun. 2023, Art. no. 103905.
[27] T. Wang, M. Ma, S. Liang, J. Yang, and Y . Wang, “Robust lane change
decision for autonomous vehicles in mixed traﬃc: A safety-aware multi-
agent adversarial reinforcement learning approach,” Transp. Res. C,
Emerg. Technol., vol. 172, Mar. 2025, Art. no. 105005.
[28] Y . Guo, J. Liu, R. Yu, P. Hang, and J. Sun, “MAPPO-PIS: A multi-
agent proximal policy optimization method with prior intent sharing for
CA Vs’ cooperative decision-making,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.,
2024, pp. 244–263.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on March 06,2026 at 08:06:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 15 =====
1538 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 13, NO. 1, 1 JANUARY 2026
[29] D. Chen et al., “Deep multi-agent reinforcement learning for highway
on-ramp merging in mixed tra ﬃc,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. ,
vol. 24, no. 11, pp. 11623–11638, Nov. 2023.
[30] Z. Yang, H. Huang, G. Wang, X. Pei, and D.-Y . Yao, “Cooperative
driving model for non-signalized intersections with cooperative games,”
J. Central South Univ. , vol. 25, no. 9, pp. 2164–2181, Sep. 2018.
[31] R. Tian, N. Li, I. Kolmanovsky, Y . Yildiz, and A. R. Girard, “Game-
theoretic modeling of tra ﬃc in unsignalized intersection network for
autonomous vehicle control veriﬁcation and validation,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst. , vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 2211–2226, Mar. 2022.
[32] K. Liu, N. Li, H. E. Tseng, I. Kolmanovsky, and A. Girard, “Interaction-
aware trajectory prediction and planning for autonomous vehicles in
forced merge scenarios,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 1,
pp. 474–488, Jan. 2023.
[33] Q. Zhang, R. Langari, H. E. Tseng, D. Filev, S. Szwabowski, and
S. Coskun, “A game theoretic model predictive controller with aggres-
siveness estimation for mandatory lane change,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Vehicles, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 75–89, Mar. 2020.
[34] H. Wang, Q. Meng, S. Chen, and X. Zhang, “Competitive and cooper-
ative behaviour analysis of connected and autonomous vehicles across
unsignalised intersections: A game-theoretic approach,” Transp. Res. B,
Methodol., vol. 149, pp. 322–346, Jul. 2021.
[35] X. Liao et al., “Game theory-based ramp merging for mixed tra ﬃc with
unity-SUMO co-simulation,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst. ,
vol. 52, no. 9, pp. 5746–5757, Sep. 2022.
[36] L. Li, W. Zhao, and C. Wang, “Cooperative merging strategy considering
stochastic driving style at on-ramps: A Bayesian game approach,”
Automot. Innov., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 312–334, May 2024.
[37] N. Li, Y . Yao, I. Kolmanovsky, E. Atkins, and A. R. Girard,
“Game-theoretic modeling of multi-vehicle interactions at uncon-
trolled intersections,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. , vol. 23, no. 2,
pp. 1428–1442, Feb. 2022.
[38] P. Hang, C. Lv, Y . Xing, C. Huang, and Z. Hu, “Human-like
decision making for autonomous driving: A noncooperative game
theoretic approach,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. , vol. 22, no. 4,
pp. 2076–2087, Apr. 2021.
[39] V .-A. Le and A. A. Malikopoulos, “A cooperative optimal control
framework for connected and automated vehicles in mixed tra ﬃc using
social value orientation,” in Proc. IEEE 61st Conf. Decis. Control
(CDC), Dec. 2022, pp. 6272–6277.
[40] A. G. Cunningham, E. Galceran, R. M. Eustice, and E. Olson, “MPDM:
Multipolicy decision-making in dynamic, uncertain environments for
autonomous driving,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA) ,
May 2015, pp. 1670–1677.
[41] C. Hubmann, J. Schulz, M. Becker, D. Altho ﬀ, and C. Stiller,
“Automated driving in uncertain environments: Planning with interaction
and uncertain maneuver prediction,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Vehicles, vol. 3,
no. 1, pp. 5–17, Mar. 2018.
[42] R. Xing, Z. Su, Q. Xu, N. Zhang, and T. H. Luan, “Secure content
delivery for connected and autonomous trucks: A coalition formation
game approach,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. , vol. 23, no. 11,
pp. 20522–20537, Nov. 2022.
[43] Q. Zhang, R. Langari, H. E. Tseng, S. Mohan, S. Szwabowski, and
D. Filev, “Stackelberg di ﬀerential lane change game based on MPC
and inverse MPC,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. , vol. 25, no. 8,
pp. 8473–8485, Aug. 2024.
[44] E. Leurent. (2018). An Environment for Autonomous Driving Decision-
Making. [Online]. Available: https: //github.com/eleurent/highway-env
[45] W. Schwarting, A. Pierson, J. Alonso–Mora, S. Karaman, and D. Rus,
“Social behavior for autonomous vehicles,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA ,
vol. 116, no. 50, pp. 24972–24978, 2019.
Yiming Cui received the B.S. degree in transporta-
tion engineering from Tongji University, Shanghai,
China, in 2023, where she is currently pursuing
the Ph.D. degree with the Department of Tra ﬃc
Engineering.
Her main research interests include decision-
making and motion planning for autonomous vehi-
cles in the context of vehicle–infrastructure and
vehicle–vehicle collaboration.
Shiyu Fang received the B.S. degree in transporta-
tion engineering from Jilin University, Changchun,
China, in 2021. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
degree with the Department of Tra ﬃc Engineering,
Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
His main research interests include decision-
making and motion planning for autonomous vehi-
cles.
Qian Chen received the B.S. degree in transporta-
tion engineering from Tongji University, Shanghai,
China, in 2023, where he is currently pursuing
the Ph.D. degree with the Department of Tra ﬃc
Engineering.
His main research interests include behavior pre-
diction and decision-making of autonomous vehicles
based on data-driven methods.
Yafei Wang (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree in internal combustion engine from Jilin
University, Changchun, China, in 2005, the M.S.
degree in vehicle engineering from Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, China, in 2008, and the
Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, in 2013.
From 2008 to 2010, he was with automotive
industry for nearly two years. From 2013 to 2016, he
was a Post-Doctoral Researcher with The University
of Tokyo. He is currently a Professor with the School
of Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University. His research
interests include state estimation and control for connected and automated
vehicles.
Peng Hang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree from the School of Automotive Stud-
ies, Tongji University, Shanghai, China, in 2019.
He is a Research Professor at the Department
of Traﬃc Engineering, Tongji University. He was a
Visiting Researcher with the Department of Electri-
cal and Computer Engineering, National University
of Singapore, Singapore, in 2018. From 2020 to
2022, he was a Research Fellow with the School
of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore. His research
interests include vehicle dynamics and control, decision-making, motion
planning, and motion control for autonomous vehicles.
Dr. Hang serves as an Associate Editor for IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY , Journal of Field Robotics, IET Smart Cities ,
and SAE International Journal of Vehicle Dynamics, Stability, and NVH .
Jian Sun (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree from Tongji University, Shanghai, China, in
2006.
Subsequently, he was at Tongji University as a
Lecturer and then promoted to the position as a Pro-
fessor in 2011, where he is currently a Professor with
the College of Transportation Engineering and the
Dean of the Department of Tra ﬃc Engineering. His
main research interests include tra ﬃc ﬂow theory,
traﬃc simulation, connected vehicle–infrastructure
system, and intelligent transportation systems.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Cornell University Library. Downloaded on March 06,2026 at 08:06:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 